gep-4768: Standardized Telemetry API (provisional) (#4775)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-4768/index.md

1. Enforce consistent auditing and observability standards across different infrastructure providers.
2. Support emerging workloads like AI Agents, which elevate the criticality of observability due to their autonomous, non-deterministic nature and requirements for specialized signals.

### Who

- **Platform Operators**: Need to ensure uniform observability across all networking infrastructure.
- **Observability Teams**: Responsible for the governance of telemetry data. They need to define and enforce standardized schemas and collection policies across the entire organization.
- **Security/Auditing Teams**: Require a standardized audit trail for all traffic, an increasingly important need with the emergence of autonomous agent actions.
- **Application Developers**: Benefit from consistent metrics and traces for debugging without worrying about the underlying gateway technology.

## API

### Policy Attachment vs. Inline Configuration

> A key area of discussion for this GEP is whether this should be a standalone Policy Attachment (e.g., `TelemetryPolicy`) or inline configuration within the `Gateway` resource. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A key area of discussion for this GEP is whether this should be a standalone Policy Attachment (e.g., `TelemetryPolicy`) or inline configuration within `Gateway`, or `HTTPRoute` resources. 
```

This proposal argues that the Policy Attachment model is the most effective approach to meet the stated goals, primarily for two reasons:

> 1. **Separation of Concerns**: It allows different personas to manage Gateway infrastructure independently from the configuration of telemetry signals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Separation of Concerns**: When we reason about telemetry, it is commonly not the app developer that activates/sets telemetry config, its more common its the platform engineer, or in a littler larger organizations - the observability engineer or security engineer. Therefore, HTTPRoute is likely not the direction we want to start with. Similarly, It allows different personas to manage Gateway infrastructure independently from the configuration of telemetry signals.
```

2. **Uniformity**: It enables a single policy to be applied uniformly across a set of Gateways, eliminating the need to duplicate complex telemetry configurations across individual resources.

> To mitigate the challenge of complex merging semantics, this GEP restricts configuration such that only a single `TelemetryPolicy` can target a specific `Gateway` at any given time. If multiple `TelemetryPolicy` resources target the same object, precedence is determined based on the creation timestamp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mitigate the challenge of complex merging semantics, this GEP restricts configuration such that only a single `TelemetryPolicy` can target a specific `Gateway` at any given time. If multiple `TelemetryPolicy` resources target the same object, precedence is determined based on the creation timestamp. This will allow us to start with simple config and iterate based on feedback whether multiple TelemetryPolicies on the same target are needed.
```

# GEP: Standardized Telemetry API

* Issue: #4768
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

This proposal introduces a standardized, provider-agnostic Telemetry API to configure observability signals (metrics, access logs, and traces) for both North/South (Gateway) and East/West (Mesh) traffic, addressing the fragmentation caused by vendor-specific CRDs.

## Goals

> 1. Establish a standardized model to configure provider-agnostic telemetry (metrics, access logs, and traces) for both Gateway and Mesh.

Reviewer: Nit:
```suggestion
1. Establish a standardized model to configure provider-agnostic telemetry (metrics, access logs, and traces) for both Gateways and Mesh components.
```

> 2. Enable separation of concerns between the persona managing networking infrastructure (Platform Team) and the persona governing telemetry signals (Observability/Security Team).

Reviewer: why is this a goal? i.e is there an existing pain point where we have a current solution that does not distinguish between responsibilities of this personas wrt to Telemetry?

Author: My interpretation of the three [roles and personas](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/) defined by the Gateway API is that they do not explicitly recognize that the persona responsible for gateway infrastructure might not be the same persona that is responsible for delivering consistent telemetry signals. So the reason to state it as a goal is to emphasize that this separation exists in (often larger) companies. If we do not want to account this use-case, I can remove this goal.

Reviewer 2: I am a +1 of removing this goal for now. We must consider the Gateway owner the responsible for the telemetry policy at this moment.

The API focuses on providing a consistent way to express observability intent, such as sampling rates for tracing, metric customization, and log filtering, regardless of the underlying data plane implementation.

## Purpose (Why and Who)

### The Fragmentation of Observability

In the current Kubernetes landscape, the "Who, What, Where, and How Long" of network traffic is answered differently depending on the underlying proxy technology. While the Gateway API specification has unified how traffic is routed via `HTTPRoute` and `Gateway`, it has deferred the standardization of how that traffic is observed. This deferral has led to "Observability Lock-in". Platform Engineering teams are forced to learn and manage distinct APIs for each environment. A standardized telemetry API is necessary to decouple the intent of observability from the implementation. Without such standardization it is difficult for platform owners to:

1. Enforce consistent auditing standards across different infrastructure providers.

> 2. Manage "Mesh" and "Gateway" observability with a single unified API.

Reviewer 2: As a proposal: I am happy to go with this GEP if we limit for now to the Gateway attachment, and do not consider the Mesh attachment.

We can deal with Mesh attachment later as an extended feature of TelemetryPolicy. If we can for now focus on Gateway attachment only, this lgtm

3. Support emerging workloads like AI Agents, which elevate the criticality of observability due to their autonomous, non-deterministic nature and requirements for specialized signals.

### Who

- **Platform Operators**: Need to ensure uniform observability across all networking infrastructure.
- **Observability Teams**: Responsible for the governance of telemetry data. They need to define and enforce standardized schemas and collection policies across the entire organization.

> - **Security/Auditing Teams**: Require a standardized audit trail for all traffic, especially for autonomous agent actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Security/Auditing Teams**: Require a standardized audit trail for all traffic, an increasingly important need with the emergence of autonomous agent actions.
```

- **Application Developers**: Benefit from consistent metrics and traces for debugging without worrying about the underlying mesh or gateway technology.

> ## API

Reviewer: The way I read this GEP I struggle to understand if we primary target the cluster-scope first or the individual Gateways scope first. 

"Fleet Wide Uniformity" suggest we want cluster scope policies, **but** the GEP also talks about targeting different Gateways and enable different policies to different gateways (I believe we **do** aim to have this granularity? )

If the intent is to start with cluster-wide then the policy likely needs to be renamed to `ClusterTelemetryPolicy` (and in this case, it definitely needs to be a policy I hope no one would suggest having a telemetry config on GatewayClass 😀)

@gkhom Please note though this does mean that if we move to `ClusterTelemetryPolicy`, it would not be natural / intuitive (and by that would likely not be desired) that that `ClusterTelemetryPolicy` targets individual namespaced-Gateways. Instead it would make sense to target GatewayClass(es) and Mesh. Obviously you loose the (IMO necessary) granularity to have different policies to different individual gateways

Author: Personally, I think that the ideal outcome is something that allows semantics akin to both a cluster-scoped `ClusterTelemetryPolicy` as well as a namespace-scoped `TelemetryPolicy`. The former would allow cluster-level uniformity and control, while the latter allows individual instances to override their telemetry behavior. However, to reduce the scope of this GEP perhaps we can start with the namespace-scoped approach and leave cluster-scoped as future work?

Reviewer: >However, to reduce the scope of this GEP perhaps we can start with the namespace-scoped approach and leave cluster-scoped as future work?

Plus 1 - I think thats a reasonable way to go about it - @rikatz thoughts?

Reviewer 2: I think this is reasonable as well. We don't have cases of cluster wide policies, and they are a whole different conversation IMO. Let's stick with namespaced scoped policy with Gateway as the only target available for the policy for now

Author: I've updated the proposal's scope to Gateway only. Also removed mentions of fleet-wide / cluster-wide to align with namespace scoped targeting.

Reviewer: Thanks!

### Policy Attachment vs. Inline Configuration

A key area of discussion for this GEP is whether this should be a standalone Policy Attachment (e.g., `TelemetryPolicy`) or inline configuration within `Gateway` and `Mesh` resources. 

> This proposal argues that the Policy Attachment model is the most effective approach to meet the stated goals, primarily for two reasons:

Reviewer 3: This aligns with my own thinking overall for OpenTelemetry - https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4738

We want to divorce "mechanism" from "policy" here - it means we can be a lot more flexible in downstream systems for HOW telemetry policy is implemented, while making sure the configuration CRD remains stable across the diverse ecosystem of folks who interact with it.

Author: Thanks for the input and pointing us to your TelemetryPolicy PR in OTel.

> 1. **Separation of Concerns**: It allows different personas to manage Gateway infrastructure (the Platform Team) independently from the configuration of telemetry signals (the Observability team).

Reviewer: In many organizations, the platform teams are also the observability team. I think this distinction happens mostly for larger organizations. 

However, if we were to compare policy attachment vs inline in HTTPRoute as a filter for example - this distinction between app developer and platform/observability teams would be more of a strong case IMO

Author: Added my thoughts regarding this to the thread above: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/4775/changes#r3171874793

> 2. **Fleet-Wide Uniformity**: It enables a single policy to be applied uniformly across a fleet of Gateways and Meshes, eliminating the need to duplicate complex telemetry configurations across individual resources.

Reviewer: I may understand this wrong, does this argues for a policy that is applied at Mesh and Gateway level **without** distinction in targetRef (i.e targetRef that encompass both meshes and gateways in it)?

> 2. **Fleet-Wide Uniformity**: It enables a single policy to be applied uniformly across a fleet of Gateways and Meshes, eliminating the need to duplicate complex telemetry configurations across individual resources.

Reviewer: nit: cluster is more clear here, fleet can be interpreted as things across multiple clusters (at least in GKE world). 

```suggestion
2. **Cluster-Wide Uniformity**: It enables a single policy to be applied uniformly across a fleet of Gateways and Meshes, eliminating the need to duplicate complex telemetry configurations across individual resources.
```

To mitigate the challenge of complex merging semantics, this GEP restricts configuration such that only a single `TelemetryPolicy` can target a `Gateway` or `Mesh` at any given time. If multiple `TelemetryPolicy` resources target the same object, precedence is determined based on the creation timestamp.

### High-level Considerations:

- **Tracing**: Configuration for OTLP endpoints, sampling rates (probabilistic and parent-based), and custom span attributes.
- **Metrics**: Ability to enable/disable specific metric families and customize dimensions (labels/attributes).
- **Access Logs**: Filtering for smart logging (e.g., only log 5xx errors or high latency), multi-protocol support, and log format customization (including field selection).

> 

Reviewer 4: Other high level considerations:

- supporting TLS to collectors
- setting headers
- custom resource attributes (tracing)

Reviewer 2: I expect that TLS to collectors is covered by BackendTLSPolicy if we define a collector as a service

Reviewer 2: (unless ofcourse the collector is a SaaS/3rd party, outside the cluster, etc).

But yeah, this could probably  be covered as part of the experimental moment, where we should be defining the API

Author: > supporting TLS to collectors

I added the following as a non-goal: "Defining how the telemetry is exported (sinks/shippers) beyond specifying the provider endpoint."
Should that be changed if we want to consider TLS to the collectors?

> setting headers

Can you please clarify? If this is about injecting headers into requests/responses, it seems out-of-scope for a telemetry API?

> custom resource attributes (tracing)

Added resource attributes to the text.

Reviewer 4: > I added the following as a non-goal: "Defining how the telemetry is exported (sinks/shippers) beyond specifying the provider endpoint."
Should that be changed if we want to consider TLS to the collectors?

TLS should be considered, especially if the collector lives off-cluster.

> Can you please clarify? If this is about injecting headers into requests/responses, it seems out-of-scope for a telemetry API?

Some telemetry collectors may require headers like Authorization. So this would be injecting into the telemetry request.

Reviewer 2: > Should that be changed if we want to consider TLS to the collectors?

I think that given we support BackendTLSPolicy and in the future Backend services, it is fine for now to not add it and assume that this will be covered by BackendTLSPolicy. My take was to make it explicit, but honestly as soon as this is covered on a conformance test (a Gateway, with a TelemetryPolicy attached, that ships to a service with a BackendTLSPolicy) we can consider it done. Tho loud thinking this seems complicated and I hope we can use the `Backend` resource directly to point to a collector (excelent timing @keithmattix )

> Some telemetry collectors may require headers like Authorization

This must also be covered at least during the API design / experimental. I agree we need to assess how SaaS collectors works. We can say "we are defining a OTEL integration here" (fine!) but if the other part of the OTEL collector requests some sort of authorization, how to make it available?

Author: Added the "Export Configuration" bullet point to keep these requirements explicitly in scope.

# GEP: Standardized Telemetry API

* Issue: #4768
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

This proposal introduces a standardized, provider-agnostic Telemetry API to configure observability signals (metrics, access logs, and traces) for both North/South (Gateway) and East/West (Mesh) traffic, addressing the fragmentation caused by vendor-specific CRDs.

> ## Goals

Reviewer 5: IMO the goals could be more specific and better capture what this particular GEP is trying to achieve.
For example, goals like `6. Ensure the API is suitable for the broader ecosystem beyond specialized networking` or `2. Provide uniform configurability for both Gateway and Mesh use cases` feel generic enough that they could apply to almost any GEP.

Reviewer 2: +1, I think the goals can be less generic. We can say "Establish a way to configure agnostic observability shipping from a Gateway or a Mesh" and it covers almost all of the goals (at least goals 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6)

Author: Fair point, I've condensed the goals to just two points.

## Purpose (Why and Who)

### The Fragmentation of Observability

In the current Kubernetes landscape, the "Who, What, Where, and How Long" of network traffic is answered differently depending on the underlying proxy technology. While the Gateway API specification has unified how traffic is routed via `HTTPRoute` and `Gateway`, it has deferred the standardization of how that traffic is observed. This deferral has led to "Observability Lock-in". Platform Engineering teams are forced to learn and manage distinct APIs for each environment. A standardized telemetry API is necessary to decouple the intent of observability from the implementation. Without such standardization it is difficult for platform owners to:

1. Enforce consistent auditing standards across different infrastructure providers.
2. Manage "Mesh" and "Gateway" observability with a single unified API.
3. Support emerging workloads like AI Agents, which require specialized metrics (e.g., token usage, model latency) and detailed audit logs for tool-use verification.

### The Emergence of Agentic Networking

> The most recent pressing driver for this proposal is the shift in traffic patterns introduced by agentic workloads. We are moving from a deterministic Service-to-Service paradigm to a non-deterministic Agent-to-Tool and Agent-to-Agent paradigm.

Reviewer 2: while I agree with this, we need to account that this is an old required feature. I love the effort here, but I am not sure that making it an explicit need from Agentic networking makes any difference on the GEP implementation. 

We can simplify the why here, just saying that the different personas rely on observability to guarantee proper working of their services (metrics and telemetry), auditing (logs) and and costs (again metrics) without going too far on this being a pressure driver just for Agentic.

My whole point is that we can drop this section and focus on fact that observability is generic enough to cover both agentic and non agentic cases

Author: I included this because the proposal initially started in the context of agentic networking. I agree that it's likely redundant now and have removed it.

Reviewer 2: thanks!

* Context is King: Debugging requires knowing the semantic context: Which Model? Which Prompt? Which tool?

Telemetry configuration must be flexible enough to account for emerging standards, such as Generative AI semantic conventions. AI traffic should not be treated as opaque TCP streams or standard HTTP requests. Without a standardized API to enable the extraction and export of bespoke attributes the "Agentic Mesh" risks remaining an observability blind spot.

### Who
- **Platform Operators**: Need to ensure uniform observability across all networking infrastructure.
- **Observability Teams**: Responsible for the governance of telemetry data. They need to define and enforce standardized schemas and collection policies across the entire organization.
- **Security/Auditing Teams**: Require a standardized audit trail for all traffic, especially for autonomous agent actions.
- **Application Developers**: Benefit from consistent metrics and traces for debugging without worrying about the underlying mesh or gateway technology.

## API

> ### Policy Attachment vs. Inline Configuration

Reviewer 2: I like the arguing here, thanks for the explanation on the rationale. 

I think that we may need account, tho, some other approaches and concerns:
* A policy may be attached multiple times to a single Gateway or resource, what is our intent in this case?
* A gateway admin may want to disable observability on their gateway due to performance constraints (eg.: a bad logging configuration may choke I/O, it may be generating more telemetry than traffic and be consuming the whole bandwidth) and separating these personas may cause trouble for the Gateway owner.
* A Gateway admin may not be able to know if the observability is working correctly given now there is a need to verify the policy(ies) and not the Gateway status

I am not super convinced on the policy attachment here, vs having an infrastructure field that says "this is the telemetry configuration we support, on this API, CORE you must support referring to this official CRD, implementation specific you may use whatever you provider gives you but then you lose portability"

This would still allow a gateway admin to enable/disable telemetry, but leave the management to the observability team on the CRD

Author: Thanks for the input. I'm not sure I follow the proposed alternative, could you please elaborate on the following?

> ... having an infrastructure field that says "this is the telemetry configuration we support, on this API, CORE you must support referring to this official CRD, implementation specific you may use whatever you provider gives you but then you lose portability"

Regarding the other concerns:

> A policy may be attached multiple times to a single Gateway or resource, what is our intent in this case?

We should apply at most one TelemetryPolicy to any specific target. Precedence can be determined based on creation timestamp.

> A gateway admin may want to disable observability on their gateway due to performance constraints (eg.: a bad logging configuration may choke I/O, it may be generating more telemetry than traffic and be consuming the whole bandwidth) and separating these personas may cause trouble for the Gateway owner.

Doesn't this operational risk apply more generally to any policy that enables potentially compute-heavy or memory-heavy semantics in the Gateway? I do recognize the risk and perhaps there should be a generic mechanism for Gateway owners to override (e.g., disable) certain features. But that additional operational responsibility shouldn't be the core driver for the API design IMHO.

> A Gateway admin may not be able to know if the observability is working correctly given now there is a need to verify the policy(ies) and not the Gateway status

Would it be possible for the status of both the TelemetryPolicy and the targeted resource to be updated in case of invalid config or other config propagation issues?

Reviewer 2: > Would it be possible for the status of both the TelemetryPolicy and the targeted resource to be updated in case of invalid config or other config propagation issues?

We've been discussing recently on how status propagation for policies needs some re-discussion. TBF I am not really following it, but maybe you want to take a look: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/4269

> Doesn't this operational risk apply more generally to any policy that enables potentially compute-heavy or memory-heavy semantics in the Gateway?

Well, Gateway is a concern of the Gateway admin. As a gateway admin, I wouldn't like that someone applies a policy that can make my gateway unavailable, and make it hard to figure out what happened.

Just some food for thought tho, on why we should be careful on the policy approach

Reviewer 2: > Thanks for the input. I'm not sure I follow the proposed alternative, could you please elaborate on the following?

Either making telemetry configuration inline, or making telemetry configuration a resource that can be consumed as a reference like:

```yaml
spec:
  telemetryConfiguration: telemetry123
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: telemetry123
spec:
   metrics: ...
   logs: ....
```

tho I am not sure what people think of it

Reviewer: >A gateway admin may want to disable observability on their gateway due to performance constraints (eg.: a bad logging configuration may choke I/O, it may be generating more telemetry than traffic and be consuming the whole bandwidth) and separating these personas may cause trouble for the Gateway owner.

Got to agree with @rikatz here, I also dont think we have (or should) separated these personas in the past. platform engineer includes observability. I do recognize that in some organizations there are separate teams, but not convinced that a big motivation to do consider in the API. 

Regarding the proposed alternative -- I dont love that idea, with that we basically inverse policy attachment and by that create yet another permutation of our already-complex policy attachment. Targeting a policy from within the Gateway may disable the risk of changing the gateway without knowing it, however it creates a more complicated problem for the CRD owners to discover who reference them, and what is the scope of their policies. 

Given that we have been started workstreams (some of which already exist) to ease the discoverability problems with policy attachment I would rather stick to this pattern. 

I do recognize the concerns laid out here, however given that this GEP seem to be targeting the **Cluster-wide** scope primarily (at least this is the way I read it) I think making this a cluster-scoped `ClusterTelemetryPolicy` would solve some of the concerns, and make validation easier. Though I dont think we want that -- I've opened a dedicated comment to discuss that -- https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/4775/changes#r3140847116

Author: The reason I think the separation of concerns matters is because the signals generated by the gateway and mesh components cater to a variety of stakeholders. These signals are not exclusively intended for infrastructure operators that likely would only want to assess the health of the infrastructure itself. The signals that are generated represent detailed interactions between workloads/services/agents/etc. and are intended to be leveraged by app developers, SRE teams, incident responders, security auditors, etc. That's why I think that we should be careful in assuming that the Gateway/Mesh operator always dictates the configuration of these signals, even though they are responsible for the side-effects of the telemetry on their infra.

Author: I've removed the mention of a "new" observability persona and stated the "separation of concerns" point more generically.

A key area of discussion for this GEP is whether this should be a standalone Policy Attachment (e.g., `TelemetryPolicy`) or inline configuration within `Gateway` and `Mesh` resources. 

This proposal argues that the Policy Attachment model is the most effective approach to meet the stated goals, primarily for two reasons:

1. **Separation of Concerns**: It allows different personas to manage Gateway infrastructure (the Platform Team) independently from the configuration of telemetry signals (the Observability team).
2. **Fleet-Wide Uniformity**: It enables a single policy to be applied uniformly across a fleet of Gateways and Meshes, eliminating the need to duplicate complex telemetry configurations across individual resources.

> To mitigate the challenge of defining merging semantics, this GEP restricts configuration such that only a single `TelemetryPolicy` can target a `Gateway` or `Mesh` at any given time. Attaching multiple `TelemetryPolicy` resources to the same target is considered out of scope for this specification and constitutes undefined behavior.

Reviewer 2: undefined behavior is kind of dangerous once we start writing conformance, so we need to at least consider what is the expected behavior in case we go with a policy attachment

Author: I wasn't sure whether there is any precedence for explicit UB in the Gateway API. I've removed it in favor of stating that precedence will be determined based on the creation timestamp.

Reviewer 2: sounds good, we can work with that

### High-level Considerations:

- **Tracing**: Configuration for OTLP endpoints, sampling rates (probabilistic and parent-based), and custom span attributes.
- **Metrics**: Ability to enable/disable specific metric families and customize dimensions (labels/attributes).

> - **Access Logs**: Filtering for smart logging (e.g., only log 5xx errors or high latency) and field selection.

Reviewer 5: I think field selection is not enough and having the ability to specify the access log format is crucial, alongside log filtering.

Reviewer 2: IIRC from the original proposal the idea is to use CEL to define the log format. I think that on access_log we may need to account that on a Gateway, a log is not necessarily a HTTP log (eg TCPRoute, TLSRoute) and we must consider these cases when defining "what a minimum log field means"

Author: Agreed, I have added "multi-protocol support" and "log format customization" as requirements.
